Ryan Holwerda
CS342
Guide 1

Work through the following materials, recording answers to the questions so that you can bring them to class and submit them for review.

Chapter 1:

Compare and contrast data, databases, database (management) systems and information systems.
	Data: recordable facts
	Databases: collection of related data
	Database systems: computer system for creating and maintaining databases
	Information systems: Using database systems to bring value to an organization.

Compare and contrast database systems with the following, using the main characteristics of the database approach in your discussion.
- data structures and algorithms
	Data structures are used in the context of creating programs, whereas the data stored by a database systems isn't necessarily tied to a program. In addition, the data in data structures
	often isn't self-describing like the data stored by a database system.

- traditional file systems
	Traditional file systems store a wide variety of data, like a database system, but a database orders its data by rows and columns, whereas a file system is designed as a heirarchy.

Identify the stakeholders of database systems.
	Stakeholders of database systems include company managers (eg. CIO), sophisticated end users (eg. scientists, engineers, business analysts, etc.), and "naive end users" (internet data searches).

Chapter 2:

Explain the significance of the categories of data models. Which type of model is displayed in Figure 2.1?
	High-end data models are ideal for end users, as they are the least technical and the easiest to understand. Low-end data models are ideal for
	people designing databases with the technical aspects in mind. Relational data models are a union of high and low-end data models, getting close to the technical aspects of databases
	while still staying accessable to technically inexperienced users. Figure 2.1 is an example of a relational data model. 

Explain the structure and significance of the three-schema architecture.
	The internal level uses a low-level data model to describe the data storage in full detail. The conceptual level uses a relational data model to focus on "entities, 
	data types, relationships, user operations, and constraints." The external level is split into multiple 'external views' that display certain parts of a database to some users 
	while hiding the rest. These external views are often implemented with a relational data model. The three-schema architecture helps visualize the the overall schema of a database system. 

Explain the tiers used in a typical web-based information system.
	The three tiers used in a web-based information system are the client tier, the application tier, and the database server tier. The client tier is the user machine accessing the 
	information system. The database server tier provides the API which in turn allows for access to the (often SQL) database holding the requested data. The application tier sits in 
	between the client and database server tiers by taking requests from the client tier, checking the client's credentials, sending the request to the database server tier if the 
	client's credentials are good, and then sending data from the database tier back to the client.